B.Consideration

When lawyers and judges list the basic elements of a contract in the Anglo-American system, in addition to the requirement of agreement (perhaps referred to as “mutual assent” or “offer and acceptance”), they invariably speak of the requirement of “consideration.” “A promise is not enforceable,” judges have been routinely declaring for years, “unless it is supported by p. 88consideration.” Because of its historical status as a long-standing common law doctrine, consideration traditionally has been one of the prominent ingredients of a course in basic American contract law. In recent years, however, its importance has been called into question, because of the relative rarity of real-world contract disputes in which the presence or absence of consideration is likely to be a decisive factor. Consideration, it is often asserted, should be de-emphasized or perhaps even ignored in the contracts classroom. See, e.g., Alan White, Stop Teaching Consideration, 20 Nev. L. J. 503 (2020). That said, consideration remains one of the elements necessary to form a traditional contract. See Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 17(1). For this reason, consideration endures as a foundational doctrine in most first-year contracts courses.

To understand the debate about consideration, one needs to know how this element has been defined. In an earlier formulation, one which is still in widespread use today, consideration was defined in terms of either “benefit to the promisor” or “detriment to the promisee.” The “promisor” in this case is the one who made the promise the enforcement of which is in question. (If the dispute has escalated into a lawsuit, that person is probably the defendant.) The “promisee” is thus the person to whom that promise was made (probably, the plaintiff). This version asks: Did the person making the promise get something for it (“receive a benefit”)? Did the other person part with something (“suffer a detriment”)? The “benefit/detriment” analysis can be seen in action in the courts’ discussions in the Hamer and Dougherty cases, below, and its origins are explored in note 2 after Hamer and the Comment on the casebook website that your professor might assign.

For over a century, however, it also has been common to define consideration in terms of “exchange.” See, e.g., Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 71. In this version, there is consideration for a promise if its performance would be part of a “bargained-for exchange,” in which one party’s performance is the “price” of the other’s, and vice versa. Since the vast majority of significant commercial transactions do contemplate an exchange of something (goods, real estate, services, etc.) for something else (typically, but not necessarily, money), the requirement of consideration in most business contracts automatically will be satisfied. (There may still be commercial situations in which the presence or absence of consideration is more problematic, however; some of these are illustrated by the Pennsy Supply and Marshall Durbin cases, below.)

When the promise in question is not part of a commercial transaction, but is made by one family member to another, or grows out of a friendly (or even romantic) relationship, consideration may not be so obviously present. Certainly, family members and friends (romantic or otherwise) can and do engage in exchange transactions between themselves—transactions which courts can and ordinarily do regard as examples of conventional contract. But sometimes such a non-commercial promise is clearly gratuitous, not made in return for any “quid pro quo.” In such cases, conventional-contract enforcement of that promise may not be available, although—as we shall see in Chapter 3—there may be other bases on which the disappointed promisee can claim some remedial protection. In the main, however, contract law is p. 89concerned with exchange transactions, in which the possible absence of consideration is usually not a major issue.
Hamer v. Sidway

New York Court of Appeals 124 N.Y. 538, 27 N.E. 256 (1891)

Appeal from order of the General Term of the Supreme Court in the fourth judicial department, made July 1, 1890, which reversed a judgment in favor of plaintiff entered upon a decision of the court on trial at Special Term and granted a new trial.

This action was brought upon an alleged contract.

The plaintiff presented a claim to the executor of William E. Story, Sr., for $5,000 and interest from the 6th day of February, 1875. She acquired it through several mesne assignments from William E. Story, 2d. The claim being rejected by the executor, this action was brought. It appears that William E. Story, Sr., was the uncle of William E. Story, 2d; that at the celebration of the golden wedding of Samuel Story and wife, father and mother of William E. Story, Sr., on the 20th day of March, 1869, in the presence of the family and invited guests he promised his nephew that if he would refrain from drinking, using tobacco, swearing and playing cards or billiards for money until he became twenty-one years of age he would pay him a sum of $5,000. The nephew assented thereto and fully performed the conditions inducing the promise. When the nephew arrived at the age of twenty-one years and on the 31st day of January, 1875, he wrote to his uncle informing him that he had performed his part of the agreement and had thereby become entitled to the sum of $5,000. The uncle received the letter and a few days later and on the sixth of February, he wrote and mailed to his nephew the following letter:

Buffalo, Feb. 6, 1875

W. E. Story, Jr.:

Dear Nephew—Your letter of the 31st ult. came to hand all right, saying that you had lived up to the promise made to me several years ago. I have no doubt but you have, for which you shall have five thousand dollars as I promised you. I had the money in the bank the day you was 21 years old that I intend for you, and you shall have the money certain. Now, Willie I do not intend to interfere with this money in any way till I think you are capable of taking care of it and the sooner that time comes the better it will please me. I would hate very much to have you start out in some adventure that you thought all right and lose this money in one year. . . . Willie, you are 21 and you have many a thing to learn yet. This money you have earned much easier than I did besides acquiring good habits at the same time and you are quite welcome to the money; hope you will make good use of it. I was ten long years getting this together after I was your age. Now, hoping this will be satisfactory, I stop. One thing more. Twenty-one years ago I bought you 15 sheep. These sheep were put out to double every four years. I kept track of them the first eight years; I have not heard much about them since. Your father and grandfather promised me that they would look after p. 90them till you were of age. Have they done so? I hope they have. By this time you have between five and six hundred sheep, worth a nice little income this spring. Willie, I have said much more than I expected to; hope you can make out what I have written. To-day is the seventeenth day that I have not been out of my room, and have had the doctor as many days. Am a little better to-day; think I will get out next week. You need not mention to father, as he always worries about small matters.

Truly Yours

W. E. Story.
P.S.—You can consider this money on interest.

The nephew received the letter and thereafter consented that the money should remain with his uncle in accordance with the terms and conditions of the letters. The uncle died on the 29th day of January, 1887, without having paid over to his nephew any portion of the said $5,000 and interest.

Parker, J. The question which provoked the most discussion by counsel on this appeal, and which lies at the foundation of plaintiff’s asserted right of recovery, is whether by virtue of a contract defendant’s testator William E. Story became indebted to his nephew William E. Story, 2d, on his twenty-first birthday in the sum of five thousand dollars. The trial court found as a fact that “on the 20th day of March, 1869, . . . William E. Story agreed to and with William E. Story, 2d, that if he would refrain from drinking liquor, using tobacco, swearing, and playing cards or billiards for money until he should become 21 years of age then he, the said William E. Story, would at that time pay him, the said William E. Story, 2d, the sum of $5,000 for such refraining, to which the said William E. Story, 2d, agreed,” and that he “in all things fully performed his part of said agreement.”

The defendant contends that the contract was without consideration to support it, and, therefore, invalid. He asserts that the promisee by refraining from the use of liquor and tobacco was not harmed but benefited; that that which he did was best for him to do independently of his uncle’s promise, and insists that it follows that unless the promisor was benefited, the contract was without consideration. A contention, which if well founded, would seem to leave open for controversy in many cases whether that which the promisee did or omitted to do was, in fact, of such benefit to him as to leave no consideration to support the enforcement of the promisor’s agreement. Such a rule could not be tolerated, and is without foundation in the law. The Exchequer Chamber, in 1875, defined consideration as follows: “A valuable consideration in the sense of the law may consist either in some right, interest, profit or benefit accruing to the one party, or some forbearance, detriment, loss or responsibility given, suffered or undertaken by the other.” Courts “will not ask whether the thing which forms the consideration does in fact benefit the promisee or a third party, or is of any substantial value to anyone. It is enough that something is promised, done, forborne or suffered by the party to whom the promise is made as consideration for the promise made to him.” (Anson’s Prin. of Con. 63.)

“In general a waiver of any legal right at the request of another party is a sufficient consideration for a promise.” (Parsons on Contracts, 444.)

p. 91
“Any damage, or suspension, or forbearance of a right will be sufficient to sustain a promise.” (Kent, vol. 2, 465, 12th ed.)
Pollock, in his work on contracts, page 166, after citing the definition given by the Exchequer Chamber already quoted, says: “The second branch of this judicial description is really the most important one. Consideration means not so much that one party is profiting as that the other abandons some legal right in the present or limits his legal freedom of action in the future as an inducement for the promise of the first.”

Now, applying this rule to the facts before us, the promisee used tobacco, occasionally drank liquor, and he had a legal right to do so. That right he abandoned for a period of years upon the strength of the promise of the testator that for such forbearance he would give him $5,000. We need not speculate on the effort which may have been required to give up the use of those stimulants. It is sufficient that he restricted his lawful freedom of action within certain prescribed limits upon the faith of his uncle’s agreement, and now having fully performed the conditions imposed, it is of no moment whether such performance actually proved a benefit to the promisor, and the court will not inquire into it, but were it a proper subject of inquiry, we see nothing in this record that would permit a determination that the uncle was not benefited in a legal sense. Few cases have been found which may be said to be precisely in point, but such as have been support the position we have taken.

In Shadwell v. Shadwell (9 C.B. [N.S.] 159), an uncle wrote to his nephew as follows:

My Dear Lancey—

I am so glad to hear of your intended marriage with Ellen Nicholl, and as I promised to assist you at starting, I am happy to tell you that I will pay you 150 pounds yearly during my life and until your annual income derived from your profession of a chancery barrister shall amount to 600 guineas, of which your own admission will be the only evidence that I shall require.

Your affectionate uncle,

Charles Shadwell.

It was held that the promise was binding and made upon good consideration.

In Lakota v. Newton, an unreported case in the Superior Court of Worcester, Mass., the complaint averred defendant’s promise that “if you (meaning plaintiff) will leave off drinking for a year I will give you $100,” plaintiff’s assent thereto, performance of the condition by him, and demanded judgment therefor. Defendant demurred on the ground, among others, that the plaintiff’s declaration did not allege a valid and sufficient consideration for the agreement of the defendant. The demurrer was over-ruled.
In Talbott v. Stemmons (a Kentucky case not yet reported), the step-grandmother of the plaintiff made with him the following agreement: “I do promise and bind myself to give my grandson, Albert R. Talbott, $500 at my death, if he will never take another chew of tobacco or smoke another cigar during my life from this date up to my death, and if he breaks his pledge he is to refund double the amount to his mother.” The executor of Mrs. Stemmons p. 92demurred to the complaint on the ground that the agreement was not based on a sufficient consideration. The demurrer was sustained and an appeal taken therefrom to the Court of Appeals, where the decision of the court below was reversed. In the opinion of the court it is said that “the right to use and enjoy the use of tobacco was a right that belonged to the plaintiff and not forbidden by law. The abandonment of its use may have saved him money or contributed to his health, nevertheless, the surrender of that right caused the promise, and having the right to contract with reference to the subject-matter, the abandonment of the use was a sufficient consideration to uphold the promise.” Abstinence from the use of intoxicating liquors was held to furnish a good consideration for a promissory note in Lindell v. Rokes (60 Mo. 249). . . .

[The defendant also argued that even if the uncle’s promise had originally given rise to an enforceable obligation, the plaintiff’s action to enforce that promise was barred by the statute of limitations—too much time had passed since the cause of action arose. The court held, however, that the uncle’s letter amounted to a “declaration of trust,” making the uncle himself a “trustee” of the promised sum on behalf of his nephew as “beneficiary.” The case thus was viewed not as the mere attempt to enforce an executory promise, but as an action to compel the delivery of a sum of money held in trust; the uncle’s original promise was viewed as having in a legal sense already been performed.—Eds.]

The order appealed from should be reversed and the judgment of the Special Term affirmed, with costs payable out of the estate.

All concur.

Order reversed and judgment of Special Term affirmed.

