Chapter 1

Introduction

■   ■   ■

A. GENERAL
1.WHAT IS TORT LAW?

Tort is a law-French word meaning injury or wrong. The legal use of the term dates to medieval England. To commit a tort is to act in a way the law considers to wrongful. Torts are called civil wrong to distinguish them from crimes. Although the word tort may be a bit vague, the types of wrongs that fall under its umbrella are quite familiar. They include assaults and batteries, medical malpractice, product defects, and a multitude of other ways in which we may hurt one another.

There are two features of the tort system that are worth discussing at the outset. First, tort law is a system with multiple objectives. The shape of the tort system depends in part on how we prioritize these goals. In Part 2 of this first chapter we examine the commonly understood aims of the law of torts and inevitable tensions that arise when these aims conflict.

Second, perhaps more than any other part of law torts has retained its common law heritage.1 In many respects it is still a body of law made by judges deciding cases based on rules set down in previous cases. Because of this tradition there is no other area, with the possible exception of the law of real property, where an appreciation of the law’s historical roots is more important. Part B of this chapter briefly outlines the development of tort law in England. It concludes with an overview of the present-day landscape.

2.AIMS OF THE LAW OF TORTS

In Star Wars terms, the torts system is more analogous to the Rebel Alliance—a group of independent actors sharing a distaste for injustice—than to the Empire—a tightly-controlled, top-down hierarchical structure. Although judges are bound by a system of precedent, a judge’s decision in a tort case typically is tied more to the facts of that individual case than to
2
any applicable rule or standard. For this reason, it would be an overstatement to say that tort law is governed by a set of goals or guiding principles. Nevertheless, when one reads many torts cases, one sees certain threads frequently appear. The most common might be summarized as (1) prevention of self-help by victims and their relatives and friends against those who have caused injury, (2) a desire to achieve corrective justice between the parties, (3) retribution against wrongdoers, (4) deterrence of wrongdoers, commonly framed as a system to achieve the proper allocation of risks, and (5) compensation for the victims of wrongdoers.

Scholars of tort law disagree about which is the dominant thread.2 It might be most accurate to say that tort law embraces all of these goals (and more) and that it lacks a coherent process for resolving cases in which various goals indicate different outcomes. As you study tort law this semester, ask yourself (1) what goals each opinion embraces, (2) whether other valid goals contraindicate the court’s outcome, and (3) why the court chose one set of goals over another.

3.THE ADAPTABILITY OF TORT LAW TO NEW SITUATIONS

Over the last century or so more and more law has become codified. As we noted above, perhaps more than any other area of law, however, torts has retained its common law (rules established case-by-case) roots.

Despite the lack of a strongly coherent, hierarchical set of precepts—or perhaps because of this lack—tort law works hard to balance the competing goals of providing a stable set of rules upon which people can rely and adapting its rules to fit the demands of justice in particular cases.

Compared with other first-year law school subjects, tort cases are often up-front about the centrality of community mores and matters of public policy. Because society’s notions about such things change over time, tort law is often asked by litigants to adapt its doctrine accordingly, while yet tending to rule-of-law concerns of consistency and predictability.

Within a body of judge-made law the objective of maintaining a stable set of rules is achieved through the concept of stare decisis (“to stand by things decided). A court should follow precedent.3 The general principle is
3
easy to state but like so many things in law the difficulty is in its particular application. Openness to change turns in part on how narrowly courts apply precedent and how open courts may be to overruling a precedent or extending it to reach a new situation.

One of the most fascinating aspects of the study of tort law is to witness this struggle over time, particularly in the development of the law of landowner liability, negligent infliction of emotional distress, product liability, abnormally dangerous activities, and defamation. The following case is illustrative of this tension.

Roberson v. Rochester Folding Box Co.

Court of Appeals of New York, 1902.
171 N.Y. 538, 64 N.E. 442.

* * * From a judgment of the appellate division (71 N.Y.Supp. 876) affirming a judgment in favor of plaintiff overruling a demurrer to the complaint, defendants appeal. Reversed.

* * *

Parker, C. J. The appellate division has certified that the following questions of law have arisen in this case, and ought to be reviewed by this court: (1) Does the complaint herein state a cause of action at law against the defendants, or either of them? (2) Does the complaint herein state a cause of action in equity against the defendants, or either of them? These questions are presented by a demurrer to the complaint, which is put upon the ground that the complaint does not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action.

* * * The complaint alleges that the Franklin Mills Company, one of the defendants, was engaged in a general milling business and in the manufacture and sale of flour; that before the commencement of the action, without the knowledge or consent of plaintiff, defendants, knowing that they had no right or authority so to do, had obtained, made, printed, sold, and circulated about 25,000 lithographic prints, photographs, and likenesses of plaintiff, made in a manner particularly set up in the complaint; that upon the paper upon which the likenesses were printed and above the portrait there were printed, in large, plain letters, the words, “Flour of the Family,” and below the portrait, in large capital letters, “Franklin Mills Flour,” and in the lower right-hand corner, in smaller capital letters, “Rochester Folding Box Co., Rochester, N.Y.”; that upon the same sheet were other advertisements of the flour of the Franklin Mills Company; that those 25,000 likenesses of the plaintiff thus ornamented have been conspicuously posted and displayed in stores, warehouses, saloons, and other public places; that they have been recognized by friends
4
of the plaintiff and other people, with the result that plaintiff has been greatly humiliated by the scoffs and jeers of persons who have recognized her face and picture on this advertisement, and her good name has been attacked, causing her great distress and suffering, both in body and mind; that she was made sick, and suffered a severe nervous shock, was confined to her bed, and compelled to employ a physician, because of these facts; that defendants had continued to print, make, use, sell, and circulate the said lithographs, and that by reason of the foregoing facts plaintiff had suffered damages in the sum of $15,000. The complaint prays that defendants be enjoined from making, printing, publishing, circulating, or using in any manner any likenesses of plaintiff in any form whatever; for further relief (which it is not necessary to consider here); and for damages.

It will be observed that there is no complaint made that plaintiff was libeled by this publication of her portrait. The likeness is said to be a very good one, and one that her friends and acquaintances were able to recognize. Indeed, her grievance is that a good portrait of her, and therefore one easily recognized, has been used to attract attention toward the paper upon which defendant mill company’s advertisements appear. Such publicity, which some find agreeable, is to plaintiff very distasteful, and thus, because of defendants’ impertinence in using her picture, without her consent, for their own business purposes, she has been caused to suffer mental distress where others would have appreciated the compliment to their beauty implied in the selection of the picture for such purposes; but, as it is distasteful to her, she seeks the aid of the courts to enjoin a further circulation of the lithographic prints containing her portrait made as alleged in the complaint, and, as an incident thereto, to reimburse her for the damages to her feelings, which the complaint fixes at the sum of $15,000. There is no precedent for such an action to be found in the decisions of this court. Indeed, the learned judge who wrote the very able and interesting opinion in the appellate division said, while upon the threshold of the discussion of the question: “It may be said, in the first place, that the theory upon which this action is predicated is new, at least in instance, if not in principle, and that few precedents can be found to sustain the claim made by the plaintiff, if, indeed, it can be said that there are any authoritative cases establishing her right to recover in this action.” Nevertheless that court reached the conclusion that plaintiff had a good cause of action against defendants, in that defendants had invaded what is called a “right of privacy”; in other words, the right to be let alone. Mention of such a right is not to be found in Blackstone, Kent, or any other of the great commentators upon the law; nor, so far as the learning of counsel or the courts in this case have been able to discover, does its existence seem to have been asserted prior to about the year 1890, when it was presented with attractiveness, and no inconsiderable ability, in the Harvard Law Review (volume 4, p. 193) in an article entitled “Rights of a Citizen to His Reputation.” The so-called “right of privacy” is, as the phrase suggests,
5
founded upon the claim that a man has the right to pass through this world, if he wills, without having his picture published, his business enterprises discussed, his successful experiments written up for the benefit of others, or his eccentricities commented upon either in handbills, circulars, catalogues, periodicals, or newspapers; and, necessarily, that the things which may not be written and published of him must not be spoken of him by his neighbors, whether the comment be favorable or otherwise. While most persons would much prefer to have a good likeness of themselves appear in a responsible periodical or leading newspaper rather than upon an advertising card or sheet, the doctrine which the courts are asked to create for this case would apply as well to the one publication as to the other, for the principle which a court of equity is asked to assert in support of a recovery in this action is that the right of privacy exists and is enforceable in equity, and that the publication of that which purports to be a portrait of another person, even if obtained upon the street by an impertinent individual with a camera, will be restrained in equity on the ground that an individual has the right to prevent his features from becoming known to those outside of his circle of friends and acquaintances. If such a principle be incorporated into the body of the law through the instrumentality of a court of equity, the attempts to logically apply the principle will necessarily result not only in a vast amount of litigation, but in litigation bordering upon the absurd, for the right of privacy, once established as a legal doctrine, cannot be confined to the restraint of the publication of a likeness, but must necessarily embrace as well the publication of a word picture, a comment upon one’s looks, conduct, domestic relations or habits. And, were the right of privacy once legally asserted, it would necessarily be held to include the same things if spoken instead of printed, for one, as well as the other, invades the right to be absolutely let alone. An insult would certainly be in violation of such a right, and with many persons would more seriously wound the feelings than would the publication of their picture. And so we might add to the list of things that are spoken and done day by day which seriously offend the sensibilities of good people to which the principle which the plaintiff seeks to have imbedded in the doctrine of the law would seem to apply. I have gone only far enough to barely suggest the vast field of litigation which would necessarily be opened up should this court hold that privacy exists as a legal right enforceable in equity by injunction, and by damages where they seem necessary to give complete relief.

The legislative body could very well interfere and arbitrarily provide that no one should be permitted for his own selfish purpose to use the picture or the name of another for advertising purposes without his consent. In such event no embarrassment would result to the general body of the law, for the rule would be applicable only to cases provided for by the statute. The courts, however, being without authority to legislate, are required to decide cases upon principle, and so are necessarily embarrassed
6
by precedents created by an extreme, and therefore unjustifiable, application of an old principle. The court below properly said that: “While it may be true that the fact that no precedent can be found to sustain an action in any given case is cogent evidence that a principle does not exist upon which the right may be based, it is not the rule that the want of a precedent is a sufficient reason for turning the plaintiff out of court,” provided (I think should be added) there can be found a clear and unequivocal principle of the common law, which either directly or mediately governs it, or which, by analogy or parity of reasoning, ought to govern it. It is undoubtedly true that in the early days of chancery jurisdiction in England the chancellors were accustomed to deliver their judgments without regard to principles or precedents, and in that way the process of building up the system of equity went on, the chancellor disregarding absolutely many established principles of the common law. * * * In their work the chancellors were guided not only by what they regarded as the eternal principles of absolute right, but also by their individual consciences; but after a time, when “the period of infancy was passed, and an orderly system of equitable principles, doctrines, and rules began to be developed out of the increasing mass of precedents, this theory of a personal conscience was abandoned; and ‘the conscience,’ which is an element of the equitable jurisdiction, came to be regarded, and has so continued to the present day, as a metaphorical term, designating the common standard of civil right and expediency combined, based upon general principles, and limited by established doctrines to which the court appeals, and by which it tests the conduct and rights of suitors,—a juridical, and not a personal, conscience.” Pom.Eq.Jur.§ 57.

The importance of observing the spirit of this rule cannot be overestimated; for, while justice in a given case may be worked out by a decision of the court according to the notions of right which govern the individual judge or body of judges comprising the court, the mischief which will finally result may be almost incalculable under our system, which makes a decision in one case a precedent for decisions in all future cases which are akin to it in the essential facts. So, in a case like the one before us, which is concededly new to this court, it is important that the court should have in mind the effect upon future litigation and upon the development of the law which would necessarily result from a step so far outside of the beaten paths of both common law and equity, assuming—what I shall attempt to show in a moment—that the right of privacy, as a legal doctrine enforceable in equity, has not, down to this time, been established by decisions. The history of the phrase “right of privacy” in this country seems to have begun in 1890, in a clever article in the Harvard Law Review,—already referred to,—in which a number of English cases were analyzed, and, reasoning by analogy, the conclusion was reached that, notwithstanding the unanimity of the courts in resting their decisions upon property rights in cases where publication is prevented by injunction, in
7
reality such prevention was due to the necessity of affording protection to thoughts and sentiments expressed through the medium of writing, printing, and the arts, which is like the right not to be assaulted or beaten; in other words, that the principle actually involved, though not always appreciated, was that of an inviolate personality, not that of private property. This article brought forth a reply from the Northwestern Review (volume 3, p. 1) urging that equity has no concern with the feelings of an individual, or with considerations of moral fitness, except as the inconvenience or discomfort which the person may suffer is connected with the possession or enjoyment of property, and that the English authorities cited are consistent with such view. Those authorities are now to be examined, in order that we may see whether they were intended to and did mark a departure from the established rule which had been enforced for generations; or, on the other hand, are entirely consistent with it.

The first case is Prince Albert v. Strange, 1 Macn. & G. 25; Id., 2 De Gex & S. 652. The queen and the prince, having made etchings and drawings for their own amusement, decided to have copies struck off from the etched plates for presentation to friends and for their own use. The workman employed, however, printed some copies on his own account, which afterwards came into the hands of Strange, who purposed exhibiting them, and published a descriptive catalogue. Prince Albert applied for an injunction as to both exhibition and catalogue, and the vice chancellor granted it, restraining defendant from publishing, “at least by printing or writing, though not by copy or resemblance,” a description of the etchings. An examination of the opinion of the vice chancellor discloses that he found two reasons for granting the injunction, namely, that the property rights of Prince Albert had been infringed, and that there was a breach of trust by the workman in retaining some impressions for himself. The opinion contained no hint whatever of a right of privacy separate and distinct from the right of property.

Pollard v. Photographic Co., 40 Ch.Div. 345, is certainly not an authority for granting an injunction on the ground of threatened injury to the feelings, although it is true, as stated in the opinion of the appellate division, that the court did say in the course of the discussion that the right to grant an injunction does not depend upon the existence of property; but the decision was, in fact, placed upon the ground that there was a breach of an implied contract. The facts, briefly stated, were that a photographer had been applied to by a woman to take her photograph, she ordering a certain number of copies, as is usual in such cases. The photographer made copies for himself, and undertook to exhibit them, and also sold copies to a stationer, who used them as Christmas cards. Their action was restrained by the court on the ground that there was an implied contract not to use the negative for any other purpose than to supply the sitter with copies of it for a price. During the argument of plaintiff’s counsel the court asked this question: “Do you dispute that, if the negative likeness were taken on
8
the sly, the person who took it might exhibit copies?” Counsel replied, “In that case there would be no consideration to support a contract.”

* * *

In Duke of Queensberry v. Shebbeare, 2 Eden, 329, the Earl of Clarendon delivered to one Gwynne an original manuscript of his father’s “Lord Clarendon’s History.” Gwynne’s administrator afterwards sold it to Shebbeare, and the court, upon the application of the personal representatives of Lord Clarendon, restrained its publication on the ground that they had a property right in the manuscript which it was not intended that Gwynne should have the benefit of by multiplying the number of copies in print for profit.

In not one of these cases, therefore, was it the basis of the decision that the defendant could be restrained from performing the act he was doing or threatening to do on the ground that the feelings of the plaintiff would be thereby injured; but, on the contrary, each decision was rested either upon the ground of breach of trust, or that plaintiff had a property right in the subject of litigation which the court could protect.

* * *

The case that seems to have been more relied upon than any other by the learned appellate division in reaching the conclusion that the complaint in this case states a cause of action is Schuyler v. Curtis, 147 N.Y. 434, 42 N.E. 22. * * * In that case certain persons attempted to erect a statue or bust of a woman no longer living, and one of her relatives commenced an action in equity to restrain such erection, alleging that his feelings and the feelings of other relatives of deceased would be injured thereby. At special term an injunction was granted on that ground. 19 N.Y.Supp. 264. The general term affirmed the decision. 64 Hun, 594. This court reversed the judgment, Judge Peckham writing, and, so far as the decision is concerned, therefore, it is not authority for the existence of a right of privacy which entitles a party to restrain another from doing an act which, though not actionable at common law, occasions plaintiff mental distress. In the course of the argument, however, expressions were used which it is now claimed indicate that the court recognized the existence of such a right. A sufficient answer to that contention is to be found in the opinion written on the motion for reargument in Colonial City Traction Co. v. Kingston City R. Co., 154 N.Y. 493, 48 N.E. 900, in which it was said: “It was not our intention to decide any case but the one before us. * * * If, as sometimes happens, broader statements were made by way of argument or otherwise than were essential to the decision of the questions presented, they are the dicta of the writer of the opinion, and not the decision of the court. A judicial opinion, like evidence, is only binding so far as it is relevant; and when it wanders from the point at issue it no longer has force as an official utterance.” The question up for decision in the Schuyler Case was whether the relatives could restrain the threatened action of
9
defendants, and not whether Mrs. Schuyler could have restrained it had she been living. The latter question not being before the court, it was not called upon to decide it, and, as we read the opinion, there is no expression in it which indicates an intention either to decide it or to seriously consider it; but, rather, it proceeds upon the assumption that, if such a right did exist in Mrs. Schuyler, her relatives did not succeed to it upon her death. * * *

* * *

An examination of the authorities leads us to the conclusion that the so-called “right of privacy” has not as yet found an abiding place in our jurisprudence, and, as we view it, the doctrine cannot now be incorporated without doing violence to settled principles of law by which the profession and the public have long been guided.

* * *

The judgment of the appellate division and of the special term should be reversed and [the] questions certified answered in the negative. * * *

Gray, J. (dissenting).

* * *

* * * As I have suggested, that the exercise of this peculiar preventive power of a court of equity is not found in some precisely analogous case, furnishes no valid objection at all to the assumption of jurisdiction if the particular circumstances of the case show the performance, or the threatened performance, of an act by a defendant, which is wrongful, because constituting an invasion, in some novel form, of a right to something which is, or should be conceded to be, the plaintiff’s, and as to which the law provides no adequate remedy. It would be a justifiable exercise of power whether the principle of interference be rested upon analogy to some established common-law principle, or whether it is one of natural justice. In an article in the Harvard Law Review of December 15, 1890, which contains an impressive argument upon the subject of the “right of privacy,” it was well said by the authors: “That the individual shall have full protection in person and in property is a principle as old as the common law; but it has been found necessary from time to time to define anew the exact nature and extent of such protection. * * * The right to life has come to mean the right to enjoy life,—the right to be let alone; the right to liberty secures the exercise of extensive civil privileges; and the term ‘property’ has grown to comprise every form of possession, intangible as well as tangible.” * * * The proposition is, to me, an inconceivable one that these defendants may, unauthorizedly, use the likeness of this young woman upon their advertisement as a method of attracting widespread public attention to their wares, and that she must submit to the mortifying
10
notoriety, without right to invoke the exercise of the preventive power of a court of equity.

Such a view, as it seems to me, must have been unduly influenced by a failure to find precedents in analogous cases, or some declaration by the great commentators upon the law of a common-law principle which would precisely apply to and govern the action, without taking into consideration that in the existing state of society new conditions affecting the relations of persons demand the broader extension of those legal principles which underlie the immunity of one’s person from attack. I think that such a view is unduly restricted, too, by a search for some property which has been invaded by the defendants’ acts. Property is not, necessarily, the thing itself which is owned; it is the right of the owner in relation to it. The right to be protected in one’s possession of a thing or in one’s privileges, belonging to him as an individual, or secured to him as a member of the commonwealth, is property, and as such entitled to the protection of the law. The protective power of equity is not exercised upon the tangible thing, but upon the right to enjoy it; and so it is called forth for the protection of the right to that which is one’s exclusive possession as a property right. It seems to me that the principle which is applicable is analogous to that upon which courts of equity have interfered to protect the right of privacy in cases of private writings, or of other unpublished products of the mind. The writer or the lecturer has been protected in his right to a literary property in a letter or a lecture, against its unauthorized publication, because it is property to which the right of privacy attaches. * * * I think that this plaintiff has the same property in the right to be protected against the use of her face for defendant’s commercial purposes as she would have if they were publishing her literary compositions. The right would be conceded if she had sat for her photograph; but if her face or her portraiture has a value, the value is hers exclusively, until the use be granted away to the public. Any other principle of decision, in my opinion, is as repugnant to equity as it is shocking to reason.

* * *

The right to grant the injunction does not depend upon the existence of property which one has in some contractual form. It depends upon the existence of property in any right which belongs to a person * * *. It would be, in my opinion, an extraordinary view, which, while conceding the right of a person to be protected against the unauthorized circulation of an unpublished lecture, letter, drawing, or other ideal property, yet would deny the same protection to a person whose portrait was unauthorizedly obtained and made use of for commercial purposes. The injury to the plaintiff is irreparable, because she cannot be wholly compensated in damages for the various consequences entailed by defendants’ acts. The only complete relief is an injunction restraining their continuance. Whether, as incidental to that equitable relief, she should be able to recover
11
only nominal damages, is not material, for the issuance of the injunction does not, in such a case, depend upon the amount of the damages in dollars and cents.

* * *

O’Brien, Cullen, and Werner, JJ., concur with Parker, C.J. Bartlett and Haight, JJ., concur with Gray, J.

Judgment reversed, etc.

Notes

1.The tension between dependable rules and openness to change is nothing new. In medieval England, as in all monarchies of the time, the judicial, legislative and executive functions were not the separate institutions they have become today. Only slowly in the Twelfth and Thirteenth centuries were the three great common law courts spun off or developed by the Kings Council (the curia regis). These courts, Common Pleas, Kings Bench, and the Court of the Exchequer, limited themselves in important ways. For example, they only gave money damages in civil matters and if one wanted to avail oneself of these courts one had to fit one’s claim within one of the forms of action, about which we say more below.

If the law courts provided no remedy or an inadequate remedy, one could appeal to the crown. Eventually, such appeals were delegated to the Lord Chancellor, from whom one purchased formal writs. By the Fourteenth century Chancery was operating as a court that provided remedies to deserving plaintiffs that were unavailable according to the strict procedures of the common law. Clearly at its inception, this court was very open to new theories and new remedies. However, as noted in the Roberson opinion, equity ultimately developed a system of precedent much like the common-law courts and became less open to novel claims.

As you read cases in the coming weeks, you should keep in mind this constant ebb and flow of openness to new legal theories and the extension of old rules to new situations.

2.The question of privacy has now become a major issue in the law. The particular issue involved in the Roberson case was, in 1903, resolved by the New York legislature in favor of granting a cause of action to similarly situated plaintiffs. Section 51 of the New York Civil Rights Law, as amended, provides that any person “whose name, portrait or picture is used * * * for advertising purposes or for the purposes of trade without * * * written consent * * * may maintain an equitable action * * * to prevent and restrain the use thereof; and may also sue and recover damages for any injuries sustained by reason of such use.” The statute provides for the imposition of “exemplary” (or punitive) damages, in the discretion of the jury, if the defendant shall have acted knowingly. A companion statute, § 50 of the Civil Rights Law, makes it a misdemeanor for defendant to engage in such conduct. Many states have
12
recognized a right of privacy as a matter of common law. A leading case is Pavesich v. New England Life Insurance Co., 122 Ga. 190, 50 S.E. 68 (1905).

In fact, the right of privacy describes several related legal interest. The privacy right at the heart of Roberson is commonly called a right of publicity, i.e., the appropriation for the defendant’s advantage of the plaintiff’s name or likeness. Dean Prosser, in a well-known 1960 article, set forth three other species of the tort. They are: (1) Intrusion upon the plaintiff’s seclusion or solitude, or into his private affairs, (2) Public disclosure of embarrassing private facts about the plaintiff, and (3) Publicity which places the plaintiff in a false light in the public eye. William Prosser, Privacy, 48 Cal. L. Rev. 383 (1960).

Although most commentators have applauded the development of a right of privacy, it is now recognized that the enforcement of a right of privacy can infringe upon the interests in free speech protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution. This is especially the case with respect to the second and third types of invasion. See The Florida Star v. B.J.F., 491 U.S. 524 (1989).

In Britain, the right of privacy traditionally received little protection in situations that could not easily be subsumed under some of the property and contractual theories discussed in the Roberson case. By virtue of the Human Rights Act, 1998, however, the courts and public authorities are now directed to take account of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, usually simply referred to as the “European Convention on Human Rights.” Article 8 (1) of that Convention provides that “[e]veryone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence,” and Article 8 (2) provides that [t]here “shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right, except such as is in accordance with law and is necessary in a democratic society” for several named interests. These include “national security, public safety or economic well-being . . . the prevention of crime . . . and health and morale.” Although the Convention could be interpreted as only protecting people from the actions of the state, it is now accepted that the state is under an obligation to take measures to facilitate its inhabitants’ ability to enjoy the rights guaranteed by the Convention even against the private individuals. See Campbell v. MGN Ltd., [2004] 2 A.C. 457 (H.L.), On differences between the United States and European approaches, see James Q. Whitman, The Two Western Cultures of Privacy: Dignity Versus Liberty, 113 Yale L. J. 1151 (2004). For a privacy law treatise with some discussion of the comparative aspects of privacy see Proskauer on Privacy: A Guide to Privacy and Data Security Law in the Information Age (2d ed. 2016).

3.Ultimately in both England and the United States a single court deals with both legal and equitable claims. However, one important difference remains. Recall that at common law, litigants were only entitled to money damages but if one invoked equity jurisdiction one might be entitled to other remedies. Ms. Roberson sued the defendants in both law and equity. In equity she sought to enjoin the defendants from posting the advertisements. If you
13
were in her position which would you prefer, money damages or this injunction? Can you think of any other remedy you might prefer?

In most of the cases that follow in this casebook the plaintiff is seeking only money damages. However, there are some areas of law where plaintiffs frequently seek other remedies, including injunctions. This is more apparent in Chapter 10, which deals with the law of nuisance.

4.You will recall that, in addition to asking for an injunction, Ms. Roberson also asked for $15,000 in damages most of which was claimed to be compensation for the mental distress and humiliation that she suffered. How did she and her lawyers arrive at that figure? Suppose the Court had decided that Ms. Roberson had a cause of action against the defendants for invasion of her privacy. How would a jury determine the amount of damages to which she was entitled? The question of determining the proper award of damages for intangible injuries is a difficult one that will be addressed in Chapter 11. Should there be some relationship between the amount of damages awarded for injury to intangible interests and the amounts awarded for tangible injury? Consider Seffert v. Los Angeles Transit Lines, 56 Cal.2d 498, 15 Cal.Rptr. 161, 364 P.2d 337 (1961). In that case the majority affirmed a judgment, entered on a jury verdict, of $187,903.75 in favor of an injured woman who, at the time of trial, had an anticipated life expectancy of almost 35 years. From the material preserved in the trial record, the appellate court broke down the award as follows: approximately $54,000 represented pecuniary loss in the form of past and future medical expenses and loss of earnings from the time of the accident to the time of trial and possible loss of future earnings; the remaining $134,000 was presumed to be for pain and suffering. At the time, the total judgment was considered unusually large and the defendants, on appeal, claimed that the damages were excessive. In a 4–3 decision, a majority of the Supreme Court of California found no basis upon which to disturb the judgment. Writing for the three dissenters, Justice Traynor noted that the plaintiff had returned to her $375 a month job as a file clerk. Judge Traynor felt that the award was out of line with previous awards for pain and suffering. The majority stressed that the jury was entitled to rely on the evidence that the plaintiff had had to have nine operations, many of them painful, and that she might need to have future operations, as well as the plaintiff’s testimony that, although she had gone back to work, she experienced difficulty in standing, walking, or even sitting. As the tort course proceeds and you see more cases in which these issues arise, consider how you would solve these questions as to the proper amount of money that should be awarded for so-called intangible injury, such as, for example, pain and suffering or humiliation.

In order to fully understand Ms. Roberson’s monetary claim one must have some understanding of the value of $15,000. One way to think about this is to ask how much money would be an equivalent amount today. The answer to this question, it turns out, is quite complicated. See https://www.‌measuring‌worth.com/.

5.The study of law is preeminently the study of argumentation. One of the chief purposes of law school education is to teach the student how to make
14
an effective argument to a court or other legally trained decision-makers. The appropriateness of any argument depends, of course, in part on the subject matter involved, but the nature of the audience is even more important. An experienced advocate knows that some types of argument appeal to some judges more than they do to others. Depending upon the composition of the court before which he is appearing, he will gauge his argument accordingly. Some particular types of argument, however, are recurrent in legal argumentation. The Roberson case has been presented in some detail because it is a rich store of the types of argument that can be presented, on both sides of the issue, when a new type of case is presented to a court.

B. THE HISTORY OF TORT LAW
1.BEFORE AND AFTER THE NORMAN CONQUEST

Despite tort law’s constant development and adaptation over time, there is probably no branch of the law, except perhaps for the law of real property, which has been so heavily influenced by its course of historical development and none, except perhaps again for the law of real property, in which the modern law can be traced so clearly and continuously to its ancient foundations.

Indeed, it would be hard to imagine a community of people, no matter how primitive, that had not evolved some institutional means of handling the injuries that people, interacting on a daily basis, inevitably occasionally inflict upon each other. In our relatively more advanced society it is commonplace to distinguish between the means by which wrongs are redressed. Some wrongs are redressed under the law of torts; others under the criminal law; and others under both branches of our law. It is characteristic of the early stages of legal development, however, that there was no clear distinction between criminal and tort law. In fact, before the rise of an institutionalized authority able to prosecute and to punish what may be conceived of as public wrongs, the sole legal redress for conduct that we would conceive of as criminal was typically provided by remedies that are much more analogous to modern tort remedies than to modern criminal law. This was certainly to a large extent true of early Roman law4 and it was also true of English law during its earliest periods.5 In pre-conquest England what is generally called an “emendatory” system of justice largely prevailed. To this extent, it was primarily what we would classify as tort law. Under an emendatory system someone injured by another—or in the case of death, the deceased’s kinsmen—was entitled to compensation from the aggressor and/or his kinsmen. In this way, it was hoped to achieve the “composition” of the dispute between the parties and their kin and thus prevent recourse to self-help and the development of feuds. In Anglo-Saxon
15
England the amount of compensation (called “wergild” where death ensued; “bot” where it did not) varied according to the nature of the injury inflicted and the status of the injured person.6

There were, however, features of the emendatory system that prevailed in Anglo-Saxon England that were clearly characteristic of modern criminal law. Thus, in addition to the compensation paid by the wrongdoer to his victim or the victim’s kinsmen as a composition for the injury inflicted, the wrongdoer was also obliged to pay a sum known as “wite.” This sum was probably initially considered as the payment of something in the nature of costs to the authority that maintained the court to which the matter was referred. In time, however, wite came to be considered as a penalty, and it was paid either to the crown or to someone to whom the crown had granted the right to receive wite, as, for example, a magnate who was granted by the crown the right to hold a court with cognizance of the matters in question.

The Norman conquerors initially made little overt change in the system that they found functioning in England, although the emendatory system inherited from the Anglo-Saxons gradually fell into disuse and in time faded away. Instead, the Normans engrafted upon it a new remedy, hat they brought with them from Normandy, called the appeal of felony.7 It was available only when what we would consider a serious crime was committed. Under this procedure, the injured person—or, in cases involving matters like homicide or rape, a kinsman—brought what came to be considered, for jurisdictional purposes, a civil action against the alleged wrongdoer, although the appeal of felony was, for analytical purposes, more fruitfully considered a criminal and not a civil proceeding. The remedy was hedged in with many procedural requirements. For example, the appellor had to raise the hue and cry among his neighbors who would assist him in pursuing the wrongdoer until he was caught or had outdistanced his pursuers; a formal complaint had to be made, with all diligence, to some administrative official such as the bailiff of the hundred court (the local court) or, after 1194, when this office was probably established, to the Coroner. If these and other procedural steps were properly followed, the appellor (or appellant) in due course then brought his action in a court of competent jurisdiction and trial was by battle. There gradually arose ways by which the appellee (or defendant) could avoid battle and have the matter referred to a jury if he wished, but, in theory at any rate, he could always insist upon it except in a few circumstances such as where the appellant was an infant, a woman, or over 60 years of age. Although it had long since ceased to be a major heading of litigation the
16
appeal of felony was not actually completely abolished until 1819 (59 George III, c. 46).8

In 1166, the foundations of a new criminal procedure by way of indictment, through what in time came to be called the grand jury, were established by Henry II in the Assize (or statute) of Clarendon. Under this procedure, a jury of twelve men was to be appointed in each county to inquire whether certain crimes had been committed and to present to the itinerant royal justices the names of those suspected of having committed these crimes.9 At about the same time, the crown started making available to litigants in civil matters new remedies pursuable before royal judges. In the beginning, these remedies concerned controversies over the use and possession of real property. Prior to this intrusion of royal justice an individual was largely forced to resort to the court of his feudal superior.10 Except for the great magnates, or tenants in chief, who held land directly from the Crown, resort to the king was originally extremely difficult, and then only when one was able to show some extraordinary injustice perpetrated in the feudal courts. Gradually, these new remedies, to which others were in time added, became so attractive that the feudal courts began to disappear. The fees for holding a court became so few that it was no longer worth a lord’s time and expense to maintain a court. In this brief sketch of the early history of the common law we can see the origins of both our modern tort law and our modern criminal law.

From the thirteenth century onward, as royal justice expanded, as the three great common law courts emerged, as royal justice was increasingly brought into the hinterlands through itinerant justices, sometimes called justices in eyre, the development of criminal and tort law started to diverge more clearly. It is with the development of the law of torts, of course, that we are concerned.
17
2.THE FORMS OF ACTION: WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO BE RESPONSIBLE?

Most of modern tort law evolved from two ancient forms of action, trespass and trespass on the case, intended to provide a civil remedy for harms. Their use involved purchase of what was known as an “original” writ from the Royal Chancery.11 In a feudal society, maintenance of a court and of a system of justice were partially money-making schemes.

The writ of trespass first appeared in the latter part of the 13th Century. Despite an impressive amount of scholarship devoted to the study of its first appearance and its early development, the origins of the writ are still in dispute.12 Trespass on the case emerged somewhat later and, like its twin, its origins are also a matter of controversy.13 However these two writs may have arisen, they were eventually understood to differ in this important way. The action of trespass came to be considered the appropriate remedy when the plaintiff alleged that he had been injured as the immediate result of some conduct on the part of the defendant.14

Where the plaintiff’s injury was merely a consequential effect of the defendant’s activities, trespass on the case was said to lie. A commonly given illustration concerns persons hurt as the result of the cutting down of a tree. If the tree hit someone as it fell, that person would be able to bring an action for trespass; if a traveler came upon the scene sometime later and was injured by running into the fallen tree left in a road, his remedy, if any, would have to be in trespass on the case. In many situations, however, actually determining what was consequential and what was not was a difficult task. Suppose, as in the famous Squib Case, the defendant threw a “squib” (a firecracker) into the street and the plaintiff was injured when the squib exploded after it had been kicked away by the first pedestrian it
18
came close to?15 The difficulties became even more pronounced with the rise of the industrial revolution and the attempts to impose liability upon employers for injuries caused by their employees.16

There are two things worth noting about these writs. First, they differed based on the way in which a harm occurred. This way of dividing up the tort landscape seems odd to us today because, as we shall see, modern tort law is more often categorized based not on kinds of harm but on kinds of fault of the wrongdoer, i.e. intentional torts, negligence actions, and liability without fault (strict liability).17

Second, and relatedly, because the focus was on the way a harm occurred it is not entirely clear what mental state was required of the wrongdoer in order for liability to attach. Keep in mind that our knowledge of what was required comes primarily from reports in the Year Books18 and they are almost exclusively concerned with the pleadings stage of a case. We do not know what happened at trial or even if there was a so-called trial.

The sergeants-at-law, the elite of the English Bar at this period who were appointed by royal writ from senior practicing lawyers, pleaded their cases in the great hall of Westminster; any issues of fact that needed trial were usually tried subsequently and in the country with locally drawn
19
juries.19 Furthermore, the earliest juries were chosen principally because they were likely to know either what the facts actually were or to report the belief of the community as to the actual facts; the jury could thus respond to the inquiries from the royal justices. There were no trials of issues of fact in the modern sense of the term “trial.”20 The sergeants-at-law often neither knew nor cared about what transpired at this fact-finding stage. We do not know, and perhaps will never know by what standard these jurors would judge a case sent to them. However, the pleadings give some sense of what the judges and lawyers were thinking on this question.

In an action for trespass on the case the plaintiff had to set forth in the pleadings the factual basis of the plaintiff’s claim. These facts indicated how the plaintiff was harmed and what the defendant did that was wrongful (intentional or negligent). But even here some claims, i.e. against jailors for allowing a prisoner to escape or liability for the escape of a known vicious dog seem to have been governed by something resembling a strict liability claim. As we shall see in Chapter 8, the latter form of strict liability still prevails today.

In trespass the situation is much murkier because detailed allegations of the factual nature of the plaintiff’s claim were unnecessary. A bare assertion that the defendant directly caused harm was sufficient without specific pleadings as to the nature of the defendant’s conduct or even to the issue of damages.21 The burden of going forward was then on the defendant. Could the defendant avoid liability by pleading a lack of intention or an inability to have avoided the harm? The answer is not clear. What we do have are cases where the pleadings are open to multiple interpretations.22
20
For the first year law student the important point is not to resolve this thorny historical question. Rather, it is to understand that different torts require different mental states before one may be held responsible. In the next chapter we explore those torts that require proof the defendant intended a wrongful act. In Chapters 3 and 4 we turn to torts that do not require that the defendant intended a wrongful act, but do require that in some relevant way the defendant could have done otherwise. In tort law, this idea is commonly expressed as an assertion that the defendant was negligent. In each of these chapters a central task is to understand the complex legal meanings given to the concepts of intent and negligence. Later, in Chapter 8, we turn to those situations where the legal system imposes “strict liability.” Here, the defendant may be responsible even if the defendant did not intend a wrong nor act negligently.

3.THE MODERN LANDSCAPE OF TORT LAW

Today, the ancient writs of trespass and case have been abandoned in favor of the so-called “general pleading.” Under our current system, if a plaintiff alleges facts which, if true, would constitute a “wrong” according to the courts, the judge will allow the case to go to a jury for determination of liability. With the adoption of the general pleading, one might expect courts to have discarded the formal organization of claims altogether. To the contrary, courts still require a plaintiff to plead and establish the elements of a “cause of action.” A cause of action is analogous to its historical predecessor, the writ, in that a suit may be dismissed if the plaintiff fails to allege facts sufficient to satisfy a certain pre-existing set of elements. Unlike the writ, however, the elements of a cause of action are not formalistic, but rather focus on the substance of the defendant’s alleged wrong.

Each element of a cause of action represents a concept that courts have determined is necessary to justify a remedy for the plaintiff. For example, as we will study in depth in Chapters 3 through 6, in order to succeed in the negligence cause of action, a plaintiff must establish (1) that the defendant owed a duty of care, (2) that the defendant breached that duty, (3) that the defendant’s breach caused the plaintiff’s harm, (4) that the plaintiff’s harm was properly within the scope of liability, and (5) that the plaintiff suffered a legally cognizable harm. So, for example, even if every other element were fulfilled, if a plaintiff cannot prove that the defendant’s negligent conduct caused the plaintiff’s injury, it would not be just for the court to order the defendant to pay for it. In short, each concept represents a piece of the justice puzzle.

The modern division of a cause of action into a series of conceptual elements serves three purposes. First, a list of elements guides the liability inquiry by providing the court and jury with a structured, ordered method of reasoning. Because each court follows the same pattern of elements, such
21
blueprints serve the rule of law by helping to ensure that like cases will be decided alike.23 Second, by considering concepts distinctly and in ordered sequence, courts more capably identify the characteristics of each legal concept, isolate the analysis of each concept from that of others, and determine the relationship between concepts. This, in turn, coalesces courts’ understanding of the prerequisites to liability and leads to a more accurate and consistent application of them. For example, courts’ understanding that the element of duty is distinct from and antecedent to the element of breach ensures that the unreasonableness of a defendant’s actions does not necessarily lead to that defendant’s liability—if the defendant owed no duty of care, then the defendant’s unreasonable conduct is not blameworthy. As another example, consideration of the relationship between the concepts of breach and factual causation is a necessary step in the proper resolution of many toxic tort cases.24 Third, setting out a theory of recovery as a series of elements provides a useful means by which to segregate issues to be decided by the court from those left in the first instance to the jury. As you will throughout the semester, this issue is central to understanding the law of torts.

Negligence—covering cases of accidental, but unreasonable behavior—is the most common cause of action among modern tort cases, and a large portion of this book is dedicated to understanding its often-mercurial elements. Tort law, however, is composed of a wide variety of causes of action—products liability, assault, battery, false imprisonment, negligent infliction of emotional distress, intentional infliction of emotional distress, defamation, nuisance, trespass, trespass to chattels, and fraud, to name a few. Each cause of action has its unique set of elements, although every action requires a plaintiff to prove causation and scope of liability.

Of the fact patterns that give rise to tort actions, automobile accidents comprise far and away the largest category, followed by medical malpractice (a distant second), injuries from dangerous conditions on land, and intentional torts such as battery and assault. Other common fact patterns involve the theft of or damage to property, harm caused by defective products, harm to another’s reputation, legal or accountant malpractice, animal attacks, toxic torts or environmental harms, and emotional harms caused by outrageous behavior.

22
It is difficult to estimate the number of torts that occur in the United States each year. Looking at but one slice of this question, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration reports that since 2013, reported car accidents have topped six million yearly. Of course, not all accidents are reported and not all accidents are caused by torts, but any way you shake it, this is a lot of fodder for the torts system. Most tort cases of all types settle before a complaint is even filed, typically via negotiations with insurance companies. Of claims filed with a court, only about 3% of tort claims go to trial. Interestingly, however, although tort claims make up only 6% of the total civil claims filed, they constitute 60% of the civil trial docket. Thus, although there aren’t as many tort claims as contract claims, for example, tort claims are much less likely to be dismissed or settled out of court.25

The number of tort actions has declined significantly and consistently over recent decades.26 There are multiple reasons for this drop. There is evidence that certain classes of injuries have decreased significantly with the development of safer technology and more robust regulation by agencies such as the Consumer Product Safety Commission.27 The number of automobile accident-related injuries, for example, has decreased by over 33% since 1996 despite an increase in accidents.28 In addition, the decline in suits is also at least partly the result of legislative and judicial adoption of policies advocated by the tort reform movement29—policies such as damages caps, heightened pleading requirements, and the aggressive judicial use of the power to summarily dismiss cases at an early stage.

Damages caps reduce the number of tort claims in the following way. Suppose, for example, that a statute limits recoverable damages to $100,000. A plaintiff’s attorney—typically paid a contingency fee of 30% of the plaintiff’s recovery—might well find it unprofitable to represent victims in cases in which the costs of litigation are significant, the chance of winning a recovery is at best 50%, and the recovery of damages is capped. A certain class of cases will therefore never be brought due to plaintiffs’ inability to find legal representation. We discuss damage caps and other aspects of “tort reform” in Chapter 13.
23
Whatever the cause for the drop in tort suits, there is little evidence that the decline reflects a weeding out of less meritorious claims. Plaintiffs’ overall win-rate at trial in tort cases hovers at approximately 50%, a figure that has remained fairly consistent for decades.30

Of the cases that go to trial, courts are not often able to follow the adage that “Justice delayed is justice denied.” The median processing time of a tort suit, from filing of the complaint to disposition at trial, is approximately a year and a half for bench trials and two years for jury trials. This time period does not include pre-complaint investigatory work or the often-prolonged attempts to collect on a plaintiff’s judgment. Nor does this time allow for appeal of the verdict, which occurs in approximately 11% of torts cases.31 In sum, it is often years before parties to a tort suit find respite from the litigation process.

The average tort trial lasts about four days. Durations vary considerably, however, depending on the complexity of the case. Asbestos cases last the longest, with an average of 13 days at trial. Malpractice and non-asbestos product liability trials are also longer than average, lasting between five and ten days. Duration also depends on whether the trial is before a judge or jury. Most tort trials are tried before a jury (90%) rather than a judge (10%), and jury trials typically last more than twice as long as bench trials.

The median award for tort plaintiffs winning at trial was $24,000 in 2005. The median award was only slightly lower in bench trials, at $21,000. These recoveries represent a 50% decline since 1992. By contrast, the median awards for product liability claims and medical malpractice cases actually rose during the same period. In 2005, plaintiffs won punitive damages—damages in excess of the plaintiff’s harm, as a means of punishing or deterring the defendant—in less than 5% of tort trials, and the median punitive damage award was $55,000.

The field of tort law remains a staple of practice for many lawyers. Its continued prominence in the first-year law school curriculum as well as on the bar exam reflects not only its importance to practice, but also its usefulness as a pedagogical tool. This semester, as you learn the complexities of intentional torts, negligence, and strict liability, you will thereby become adept at some of the core skills of a lawyer. You will learn to read a court’s opinion—and through this, to derive legal rules and
24
holdings and integrate legal concepts over a series of cases; to recognize and apply the principles of the common law; to interpret and critique judicial decisionmaking; to apply basic litigation procedure and distinguish the roles of judge and jury; to recognize and create strategies in tort litigation; and to examine critically the policy and value choices embedded in the law of torts.
Chapter 2

Intentional Torts

■   ■   ■

A. THE CONCEPT OF “INTENT”
Beauchamp v. Dow Chemical Company

Supreme Court of Michigan, 1986.
427 Mich. 1, 398 N.W.2d 882.

Levin, Justice.

The questions presented are whether the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers’ Disability Compensation Act bars an employee from commencing a civil action against his employer where the employee alleges (1) that the employer committed an intentional tort against the employee, and (2) that the employer breached its contract to provide a safe work place.

Plaintiff Ronald Beauchamp was employed for two years as a research chemist by defendant Dow Chemical Company. He applied for workers’ compensation benefits, alleging impairment of normal bodily functions caused by exposure to tordon, 2, 4-D, and 2, 4, 5-T (“agent orange”).

[He] * * * thereafter commenced this civil action against Dow. The complaint alleged that Ronald Beauchamp had been physically and mentally affected by exposure to “agent orange” and * * * that Dow intentionally assaulted Ronald Beauchamp. . . . * * * The circuit court granted summary judgment for Dow on * * * the basis that the complaint failed to state a claim on which relief could be granted.

* * *

We conclude that the contract claim is barred by the exclusive remedy provision and remand for further proceedings on the intentional tort claims.

* * *

The origin and evolution of the workers’ compensation act indicates that the legislation, including the exclusive remedy provision, was designed to provide an alternative compensation system respecting accidental and not intentional injuries.

* * *

26
Although a number of courts have agreed that the exclusivity provision of a workers’ compensation act does not preclude employees from bringing intentional tort actions against their employers, the courts have not been able to agree on a definition of “intentional” in this context. Some courts have limited the recovery to so called “true intentional torts,” that is, when the employer truly intended the injury as well as the act. Other courts have relied on the standard in the Restatement of Torts, 2d, stating that when the employer intended the act that caused the injury and knew that the injury was substantially certain to occur from the act, the employer has committed an intentional tort. The substantial certainty test has apparently been extended by at least one state to cover substantial likelihood of injury.

The Court of Appeals in the instant case declared, “In order to allege an intentional tort outside the act, the plaintiff must allege that the employer intended the injury itself and not merely the activity leading to the injury.” A number of states have adopted a similar intentional tort test requiring an actual intent to injure.

* * *

The “substantial certainty” line of cases defines intentional tort more broadly. An intentional tort “is not . . . limited to consequences which are desired. If the actor knows that the consequences are certain, or substantially certain, to result from his act, and still goes ahead, he is treated by the law as if he had in fact desired to produce the result.” Bazley v. Tortorich, 397 So.2d 475, 482, n. 54 (La.1981). It does not matter whether the employer wishes the injury would not occur or does not care whether it occurs. If the injury is substantially certain to occur as a consequence of actions the employer intended, the employer is deemed to have intended the injuries as well. The substantial certainty test tracks the Restatement definition of an intentional tort.

* * *

Another case that might be decided differently had the standard been substantial certainty rather than true intent was Serna v. Statewide Contractors, 6 Ariz.App. 12, 429 P.2d 504 (1967). Two men were killed when a ditch caved in and buried them alive. In the five months preceding the disaster, inspectors had warned that “the sides of the ditch were not sloped properly, the side was sandy, more shoring was needed, and escape ladders should be placed every 25 feet.” During that time a cave-in had occurred, burying one of the decedents up to his waist. All warnings were ignored. The court disallowed the action, finding that the act was not “done knowingly and purposely, with the direct object of injuring another.” Id. at 15, 429 P.2d 504.

The recent People v. Film Recovery Systems case decided in Illinois adds a new perspective to the different intentional tort standards. The facts
27
in the case were as follows: Film Recovery Systems went into the business of recovering silver from film negatives. This was done by placing the negatives into vats of cyanide. Hydrogen cyanide gas would bubble up from the vats and there was inadequate ventilation. The employer knew about the dangers. The labels on the chemicals being used contained adequate warnings; as a result, the employer hired only employees who could not speak or read English. The workers complained about the fumes daily. In 1981, an inspector had warned that the operation had outgrown the plant. The employer’s response was to move the executive offices while tripling the size of the operations. Eventually one worker died and several others were seriously injured because of hydrogen cyanide poisoning. The corporate officers were convicted of involuntary manslaughter.

The facts in this case are a good example of the type of employer conduct that would seem to meet the substantial certainty as well as a substantial likelihood of harm standard. It is questionable, however, whether even this outrageous conduct would constitute a “true intentional tort.” The employer did not desire to injure or kill the employees, even though the employer knew with a substantial certainty that his conduct would injure the employees.

Selecting the appropriate intentional tort test is difficult. The problem with the substantial certainty test is that it is difficult to draw the line between substantial certainty and substantial risk. In applying the substantial certainty test, some courts have confused intentional, reckless, and even negligent misconduct, and therefore blurred the line between intentional and accidental injuries. The true intentional tort standard keeps the distinction clear.

The problem with the true intentional tort test appears to be that it allows employers to injure and even kill employees and suffer only workers’ compensation damages so long as the employer did not specifically intend to hurt the worker. The facts in the Film Recovery System case are a good example. Prohibiting a civil action in such a case “would allow a corporation to ‘cost-out’ an investment decision to kill workers.” Blankenship v. Cincinnati Milacron Chemical, 69 Ohio St.2d 608, 617, 433 N.E.2d 572 (1982) (Celebrezze, J., concurring).

We adopt the substantial certainty standard. * * * [W]e stress that substantial certainty should not be equated with substantial likelihood. The facts in Serna and Film Recovery System are examples of what would constitute substantial certainty.

* * *

Remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.

28
[The opinion of Justice Boyle, concurring in part and dissenting in part, is omitted.]
28
[The opinion of Justice Boyle, concurring in part and dissenting in part, is omitted.]

Notes

1.Restatements. In 1923, an association of judges, lawyers, and academics formed the American Law Institute (ALI), whose purpose was to draft “restatements” of the law in a variety of areas. Restatements are meant to describe the law as it exists across our many jurisdictions and also to nudge the courts towards consistency, clarity, and from time to time normatively better practices. Because the ALI is composed of so many esteemed jurists (a membership limited to 3,000), and because the process of drafting a Restatement is so rigorous—requiring many drafts and the repeated review and approval of its many members—courts hold Restatements in high esteem and frequently adopt their provisions as law.

Restatement provisions consist of blackletter sections, analogous to statutes, followed by “Comments,” which explain the blackletter sections and apply them to hypotheticals called “Illustrations.” The Comments are then followed by “Reporters’ Notes,” which contain citations to supporting law and the Reporters’ reasoning.

The latest Restatement of Torts includes the following explanation of intent:

Restatement (Third) of Torts: Liability for Physical and Emotional Harm (2010)

§ 1.Intent

A person acts with the intent to produce a consequence if:

(a)The person acts with the purpose of producing that consequence; or

(b)The person acts knowing that the consequence is substantially certain to result.

Comment:

c.Purpose and substantially certain knowledge: coverage and relationship. A purpose to cause harm makes the harm intentional even if harm is not substantially certain to occur. Likewise, knowledge that harm is substantially certain to result is sufficient to show that the harm is intentional even in the absence of a purpose to bring about that harm. Of course, a mere showing that harm is substantially certain to result from the actor’s conduct is not sufficient to prove intent; it must also be shown that the actor is aware of this. Moreover, under Subsection (b) it is not sufficient that harm will probably result from the actor’s conduct; the outcome must be substantially certain to occur.

29
e.Substantial certainty: limits. The substantial-certainty definition of intent requires an appreciation of its limits. * * * The applications of the substantial-certainty test should be limited to situations in which the defendant has knowledge to a substantial certainty that the conduct will bring about harm to a particular victim, or to someone within a small class of potential victims within a localized area.

2.Restatement § 1 defines intent with regard to producing “a consequence.” As you will see, how courts define the relevant “consequence” is often outcome-determinative and depends on the particular intentional tort. As you study the torts of battery, assault, false imprisonment, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and trespass, ask yourself what precisely must be intended. Must the defendant intend only the battery or confinement, for example? That the battery or confinement would result in injury? That it would injure the particular plaintiff?

3.A much-cited case on the question of what constitutes “intent” in a civil action is Garratt v. Dailey, 46 Wash.2d 197, 279 P.2d 1091 (1955), 49 Wash.2d 499, 304 P.2d 681 (1956). In that case, Brian, aged five years, nine months, had pulled away a lightly built wood and canvas lawn chair, in order to sit on it himself, while his arthritic maiden aunt was in the process of sitting down upon it. The boy testified that he picked up the chair, moved it a few feet sideways and seated himself, at which time he discovered the plaintiff was about to sit where the chair formerly had been. He quickly got up and attempted to move the chair under the plaintiff, but was unable to do so in time. The case was tried by a judge who found for the defendant because the child did not intend to play a prank on his aunt and he did not intend to injure her. The first time the case reached the Supreme Court of Washington, that court remanded for a determination of whether the boy knew what the consequences of his moving the chair would be. The second time the case reached the Supreme Court of Washington, the court affirmed the trial judge’s finding, based on the testimony of Brian’s sister, that the boy had known his aunt had begun the slow process of sitting down when he moved the chair and, therefore, that the boy knew with “substantial certainty” that his aunt “would attempt to sit in the place where the chair had been.” Garratt v. Dailey, 49 Wash.2d 499, 304 P.2d 681 (1956). Do you think Brian was “substantially certain” his aunt would fall; that she would injure herself? The question of establishing “intent” when the defendant is a child will be further considered in Singer v. Marx, infra.

4.Returning to Beauchamp, what if a plaintiff is able to show that an employer knows that exposure to a dangerous product such as asbestos will lead to certain injury to at least some of its employees? Or that a manufacturer knows that its product will harm a certain percentage of users? Is the intent requirement satisfied? The Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 1, cmt. e explains that: “The applications of the substantial-certainty test should be limited to situations in which the defendant has knowledge to a substantial certainty that the conduct will bring about harm to a particular victim, or to someone
30
within a small class of potential victims within a localized area.” Compare Rose v. Isenhour Brick & Tile Co., 472 S.E.2d 774 (N.C. 1996) (imposing intentional tort liability on an employer who provided employees with a machine lacking in a crucial safety mechanism) with Shaw v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 973 F.Supp. 539 (D. Md. 1997) (denying intentional tort liability in a suit against a tobacco manufacturer by a plaintiff exposed to second-hand smoke). For a helpful discussion, see Kenneth W. Simons, Rethinking Mental States, 72 B.U. L. Rev. 463 (1992).

5.What needs to be known with substantial certainty in Beauchamp? That the workers would be exposed to Agent Orange? Or that they would be injured by the exposure? This raises the so-called “single/dual intent” issue, which is addressed in the following case.

6.Recklessness. In some circumstances, courts refer to a concept that is short of intent, but stricter than what we will learn in the next chapter to be negligence. Courts refer to this concept as “recklessness,” and they adopt the concept as the applicable standard in a variety of circumstances—for example, in considering liability for intentional infliction of emotional distress or, in some jurisdictions, when assigning punitive damages. In § 2 of the Restatement Third: Liability for Physical and Emotional Harm, a person is said to be engaging in “reckless” conduct if:

(a)the person knows of the risk of harm created by the conduct or knows facts that make that risk obvious to another in the person’s situation, and

(b)the precaution that would eliminate or reduce that risk involves burdens that are so slight relative to the magnitude of the risk as to render the person’s failure to adopt the precaution a demonstration of the person’s indifference to the risk.

After setting forth the black letter, the Restatement contains the following discussion of terminology.

Comment:

a.Terminology and scope. Terms conveying the idea of wrongdoing that is aggravated—even though falling short of the wrongdoing involved in intentional torts—are common in the discourse of torts. Sometimes, the term used is “gross negligence.” Taken at face value, this term simply means negligence that is especially bad. Given this literal interpretation, gross negligence carries a meaning that is less than recklessness. The term “wilful or wanton misconduct” is also frequently employed. “Wilful misconduct” sometimes refers to conduct involving an intent to cause harm; but “wanton misconduct” is commonly understood to mean recklessness. Frequently, courts refer to conduct that displays a “reckless disregard for risk” or a “reckless indifference to risk.” When a person’s conduct creates a known risk that can be reduced by relatively modest precautions, to
31
state that the person displays a reckless disregard for risk is equivalent to stating that the person’s conduct is reckless.

In what ways does recklessness differ from intent? From negligence? Suppose, for example, that a person fires a gun—without the purpose of harming anyone—into the stands of a football game. Would the person’s culpability depend on whether the stands had only three attendees, were one-fourth full, or were fully packed?

7.The term “wanton” is sometimes used as a synonym for intentional conduct. See Mountain States Tel. and Tel. Co. v. Horn Tower Constr. Co., 147 Colo. 166, 171, 173, 363 P.2d 175, 178, 179 (1961). More often, however, as in the Restatements, the term is used as a synonym for “reckless” conduct. “Fault” is another term which is sometimes ambiguous. Usually, it means tortious conduct that is either intentional, reckless, or negligent. At other times, however, the term “fault” is restricted to conduct that is negligent, or reckless or negligent, as opposed to intentional.

Wagner v. State

Supreme Court of Utah, 2005.
122 P.3d 599.

Wilkins, Associate Chief Justice.

Tracy and Robert Wagner seek review of the court of appeals’ ruling that the trial court properly granted a rule 12(b)(6) motion dismissing their suit against the State. The Wagners’ suit, which sought recovery for injuries Mrs. Wagner sustained when a mentally handicapped man attacked her while he was in the custody of state employees, was dismissed at the trial court, and affirmed at the court of appeals, on the ground that the attack constituted a battery, a tort for which the State has retained immunity from suit. The Wagners then petitioned this court for certiorari, which we granted. We now affirm.

BACKGROUND

When reviewing a 12(b)(6) motion, we recite the facts in a light most favorable to the non-moving party, though there is no dispute in this case as to the facts. * * *

Tracy Wagner was standing in a customer service line at a K-Mart store in American Fork, Utah, when she was suddenly and inexplicably attacked from behind. The Wagners’ alleged that Sam Giese, a mentally disabled patient of the Utah State Development Center (“USDC”), “became violent, took [Mrs. Wagner] by the head and hair, threw her to the ground, and otherwise acted in such a way as to cause serious bodily injury to her.”

USDC employees had accompanied Mr. Giese to K-Mart as part of his treatment program and had remained in K-Mart to supervise him. While this particular episode of violence was sudden, it was not altogether
32
unpredictable. Mr. Giese had a history of violent conduct and presented a potential danger to the public if not properly supervised.

Mrs. Wagner and her husband subsequently filed a complaint against USDC and the Utah Department of Human Services, the state agency under which USDC operates, for failing to “properly supervise the activity of” Mr. Giese while he was in its care. Because the defendants to this matter are all governmental entities, they moved to dismiss the complaint under Utah Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim, arguing that Mrs. Wagner’s injuries arose out of a battery, a tort for which the government is immune from suit. Thus, under the Governmental Immunity Act, Utah Code Ann. § 63–30–10(2) (Utah 1997) (repealed 2004), the defendants could not be held liable for injuries arising out of the battery here. The district court agreed with the government and dismissed the Wagners’ complaint, holding that because Giese initiated a contact with “deliberate” intent, his attack constituted a battery and the government was immune under the statute.

The Wagners appealed the decision to the court of appeals, arguing that the intentional tort of battery requires proof of both an intent to make a contact and an intent to cause harm thereby, and because Mr. Giese was mentally incompetent to formulate the intent to cause harm, his attack could not constitute a battery as a matter of law. The defendants, on the other hand, maintained that a person need only intend to make a harmful or offensive contact in order for that contact to constitute a battery upon another. A person need not intend to cause harm or appreciate that his contact will cause harm so long as he intends to make a contact, and that contact is harmful.

Both parties filed briefs with the court of appeals, but oral argument was not heard on the matter. Instead, the court issued a memorandum opinion affirming the district court’s order of dismissal. * * * The court of appeals reasoned that Mr. Giese’s attack on Mrs. Wagner constituted a battery under Utah jurisprudence interpreting the Governmental Immunity Act. * * * The court distinguished the case at bar from the case the Wagners cited in support of their argument, finding that Mr. Giese’s attack, unlike the incident involved in the cited case, “ ‘creat[ed] a substantial certainty [that] harm’ ” would arise out of the contact. * * *

Looking to outside case law as well, the court of appeals found that the decisions reached in other jurisdictions supported its conclusion that the resolution of the issue turned not on whether the perpetrator of the attack intended to cause harm, but rather upon “ ‘whether the injury was perpetrated deliberately or accidentally.’ ” * * * The court of appeals joined the courts of other jurisdictions, both state and federal, in declining to incorporate a requirement that the perpetrator have a certain mental state at the moment of the attack in order for that attack to constitute a battery.
33
The Wagners appealed to this court, and we have jurisdiction pursuant to Utah Code section 78–2–2(3)(a) (2002).

STANDARD OF REVIEW

When reviewing a court of appeals decision affirming a grant of a rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss, “we review the decisions of the court of appeals rather than that of the trial court . . . for correctness.” * * * Because we are reviewing a rule 12(b)(6) motion, we must “accept the material allegations in the complaint as true and interpret those facts and all reasonable inferences drawn therefrom in a light most favorable to the plaintiff as the non-moving party.” * * * We will affirm the court of appeals’ dismissal of the case only if, after granting such deference to the Wagners’ factual presentation, we still find that they have failed to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. * * *

ANALYSIS

* * *

Intent to Commit a Battery

Prosser described intent as “one of the most often misunderstood legal concepts.” * * * Because intent is also “one of the most basic, organizing concepts of legal thinking,” it is crucial that the term is properly defined and understood. We begin our analysis with the language in the Restatement itself.

The Restatement defines a battery as having occurred where “[an actor] acts intending to cause a harmful or offensive contact.” The comments to the definition of battery refer the reader to the definition of intent in section 8A. Id. § 13 cmt. c. Section 8A reads:

The word “intent” is used throughout the Restatement of this Subject to denote that the actor desires to cause the consequences of his act, or that he believes that the consequences are substantially certain to result from it.

* * *

Although this language might not immediately seem to further inform our analysis, the comments to this section do illustrate the difference between an intentional act and an unintentional one: the existence of intent as to the contact that results from the act. Because much of the confusion surrounding the intent element required in an intentional tort arises from erroneously conflating the act with the consequence intended, we must clarify these basic terms as they are used in our law before we analyze the legal significance of intent as to an act versus intent as to the consequences of that act.

Section 2 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts defines the term “act” as “an external manifestation of the actor’s will and does not include any
34
of its results, even the most direct, immediate, and intended.” * * * To illustrate this point, the comments clarify that when an actor points a pistol at another person and pulls the trigger, the act is the pulling of the trigger. * * * The consequence of that act is the “impingement of the bullet upon the other’s person.” * * * It would be improper to describe the act as “the shooting,” since the shooting is actually the conflation of the act with the consequence. For another example, the act that has taken place when one intentionally strikes another with his fist “is only the movement of the actor’s hand and not the contact with the others body immediately established.” * * * Thus, presuming that the movement was voluntary rather than spastic, whether an actor has committed an intentional or negligent contact with another, and thus a tort sounding in battery or negligence, depends not upon whether he intended to move his hand, but upon whether he intended to make contact thereby.

The example the Restatement sets forth to illustrate this point is that of an actor firing a gun into the Mojave Desert. * * * In both accidental and intentional shootings, the actor intended to pull the trigger. Battery liability, rather than liability sounding in negligence, will attach only when the actor pulled the trigger in order to shoot another person, or knowing that it was substantially likely that pulling the trigger would lead to that result. * * * An actor who intentionally fires a bullet, but who does not realize that the bullet would make contact with another person, as when “the bullet hits a person who is present in the desert without the actor’s knowledge,” is not liable for an intentional tort. * * *

A hunter, for example, may intentionally fire his gun in an attempt to shoot a bird, but may accidentally shoot a person whom he had no reason to know was in the vicinity. He intended his act, pulling the trigger, but not the contact between his bullet and the body of another that resulted from that act. Thus, he intended the act but not the consequence. It is the consequential contact with the other person that the actor must either intend or be substantially certain would result, not the act—pulling the trigger—itself. He is therefore not liable for an intentional tort because his intentional act resulted in an unintended contact. On the other hand, the actor is liable for an intentional tort if he pulled the trigger intending that the bullet released thereby would strike someone, or knowing that it was substantially likely to strike someone as a result of his act. * * *

Can an actor who acknowledges that he intentionally pulled the trigger, and did so with the intent that the bullet make contact with the person of another, defeat a battery charge if he can show that he did so only as a joke, or did not intend that the contact between the bullet and the body of the person would cause harm or offense to that person? The Wagners argue that such a showing would provide a full defense to a battery charge because the actor lacked the necessary intent to harm.

35
We agree with the Wagners that not all intentional contacts are actionable as batteries, and that the contact must be harmful or offensive in order to be actionable. We do not agree, however, that, under our civil law, the actor must appreciate that his act is harmful or offensive in order for his contact to constitute a battery. Before we resort to case law to interpret the language and application of our battery law, we can simply turn first to the plain language of the law itself for a clear refutation of the Wagners’ theory.

The plain language of the comments makes clear that the only intent required to commit a battery is the intent to make a contact, not an intent to harm, injure, or offend through that contact. * * * So long as the actor intended the contact, “it is immaterial that the actor is not inspired by any personal hostility to the other, or a desire to injure him.” * * * The actor will be liable for battery even if he honestly but “erroneously believe[d] that . . . the other has, in fact, consented to [the contact].” * * * In fact, even a healing contact motivated by a helpful intent, as in an act of medical assistance, is actionable as a battery if the actor did not in fact have permission to make the contact. * * * The linchpin to liability for battery is not a guilty mind, but rather an intent to make a contact the law forbids. The actor need not appreciate that his contact is forbidden; he need only intend the contact, and the contact must, in fact, be forbidden.

The Restatement comments illustrate this principle using two examples. In the first, an actor playing a good-natured practical joke, under the mistaken belief that he has his victim’s consent to make the contact, has committed a battery. * * * In the second example, the healing contact of a physician, acting with helpful intent but against the patient’s wishes, constituted a battery. * * * The fact that the procedure preserved the patient’s life does not change the result. [S]ee, e.g., Meyers v. Epstein, 232 F.Supp.2d 192, 198 (S.D.N.Y.2002) (holding that “the only intent necessary to support a claim of battery is simply the intent to make contact” and a physician who did not have specific permission to do so has committed a battery); Mohr v. Williams, 95 Minn. 261, 104 N.W. 12, 16 (1905), overruled on other grounds by Genzel v. Halvorson, 248 Minn. 527, 80 N.W.2d 854 (1957) (holding that a physician committed a battery even though he acted with helpful intent because he did not have the patient’s consent to perform surgery on her right ear instead of her left); Mink v. Univ. of Chicago, 460 F.Supp. 713, 718 (N.D.Ill.1978) (holding for plaintiffs in their negligence action against physicians because “[t]he requisite element of intent is . . . met, since the plaintiffs need show only an intent to bring about the contact; an intent to do harm is not essential to the action.”).

If a physician who has performed a life-saving act of assistance upon an unconsenting patient with the hope of making that patient whole is liable for battery under the express terms of the Restatement, and a practical joker who makes a contact which he thinks will be taken as a joke
36
or to which he thinks his victim has actually given consent is likewise liable, we cannot then say that other actors must intend harm through their deliberate contact in order to perfect a battery. It is beyond argument that the Restatement itself requires neither a “desire to injure” nor a realization that the contact is injurious or offensive. * * * Instead, the actor need only intend the contact itself, and that contact must fit the legal definition of harmful or offensive.

Prosser echoed the Restatement when he clarified that “[t]he intent with which tort liability is concerned is not necessarily a hostile intent, or a desire to do harm. Rather, it is an intent to bring about a result which will invade the interests of another in a way that the law forbids.” * * * While it may be argued that this statement means that the actor must intend that the contact be forbidden, all ambiguity on the point is eviscerated by Prosser’s next comment, in which he lists as one type of intentional tort the act of “intentionally invading the rights of another under a mistaken belief of committing no wrong.” * * *

Though Prosser recognizes that the plaintiff will often recover to the greatest extent “where the [defendant’s] motive is a malevolent desire to do harm,” he nonetheless ascribes the malevolence to motive, not intent, and labels the less culpable act of innocent invasion of another’s rights as an intentional invasion. * * * These comments only underscore the point repeated throughout both the Restatement and Prosser’s analysis that the only intent required is the intent to make a contact to which the recipient has not consented, and the actor need not appreciate that the victim has not consented.

In Prosser’s analysis of battery itself, he states that, in order for the contact to constitute a battery, “[t]he act must cause, and must be intended to cause, an unpermitted contact.” * * * In discussing the difference between battery and mere negligence, he focused upon “the risk that contact will result” from the act, not the risk that harm would result from the contact. * * * Yet, if battery required an intent to harm or offend, or to realize that the contact was harmful or offensive or otherwise unpermitted, the proper focus of a discussion distinguishing between negligent and intentional conduct would be upon the risk that harm or offense would result from the contact. Instead, the focus was upon whether the contact itself, not the harm resulting therefrom, was intended or resulted from mere inadvertence.

The Wagners’ argument that an actor lacks intent to commit a battery where he deliberately makes physical contact that is harmful or offensive so long as he does not realize his contact is harmful or offensive is simply in direct conflict with the commentaries in the Restatement itself and other commentaries on the law. As Prosser states, “a defendant may be liable [for battery] when intending only a joke, or even a compliment, as where an
37
unappreciated kiss is bestowed without consent, or a misguided effort is made to render assistance.” * * *

The Wagners’ theory is also in conflict with the majority of case law on the subject in both federal and state courts, including Utah. * * * While there is a dearth of case law on this precise subject from Utah state courts, our cases that do touch upon the intent element of battery generally support the majority rule to which we subscribe in this decision.

For instance, in Wright v. University of Utah, 876 P.2d 380, 387 (Utah Ct.App.1994), cert. denied, 883 P.2d 1359 (Utah 1994), the court of appeals rejected Mrs. Wright’s argument that the autistic university employee who struck her could not have committed a battery because he lacked the mental capacity to form the requisite intent. * * *

We have also implicitly held that mental capacity is not relevant to a liability determination in other cases involving civil battery. In Higgins v. Salt Lake County, 855 P.2d 231, 233 (Utah 1993), the plaintiffs sued Salt Lake County for negligently supervising a mental patient who attacked and repeatedly stabbed their ten-year-old daughter. Though the Higginses did not raise the argument that the attacker’s insanity adjudication meant that her attack could not constitute a battery, we found that the battery exception applied. * * * The patient’s schizophrenia and marginal intelligence did not persuade us that her actions could not amount to a battery for lack of requisite intent. * * *

The Wagners correctly point out that our decision in Matheson v. Pearson, 619 P.2d 321 (Utah 1980), does not conform to the rule we have applied here. In Matheson, a maintenance man sustained injuries when a student threw a piece of candy from an open window at him, striking him in the back. * * * The only way the injured plaintiff could recover against the student for his injuries was if the act sounded in negligence rather than battery, since the statute of limitations on battery had already run by the time the case was filed. * * * We held that battery requires an intent to harm, not just an intent to make contact, and that the adolescent prank did not involve the requisite intent. * * * Thus, the injured maintenance man was able to proceed with his suit on a theory of negligence.

The Matheson case, however, was decided before we expressly adopted the Restatement definition of battery, and it has been superceded by more recent case law on the subject of intent. The reasoning promulgated in Matheson directly contradicts the very example of battery the Restatement provided. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 13 cmt. c. (“One who plays dangerous practical jokes on others takes the risk that his victims may not appreciate the humor of his conduct. . . .”). Matheson is not a correct interpretation of the Restatement on battery and it is hereby overruled. Instead, we ratify the position taken by the majority of federal and state
38
courts in rejecting the argument that the actor must intend harm or offense through his contact in order for that contact to constitute a battery.

The discussion in Miele v. United States, 800 F.2d 50 (2d Cir.1986), is informative on this point. There, the Second Circuit held that the family of a child blinded and disfigured when an insane AWOL soldier attacked him with sulphuric acid was barred by the immunity doctrine from recovering against the government, despite the family’s argument that the insane soldier could not form the requisite intent to commit a battery. The court held that the attacker’s mental capacity was irrelevant to the question of whether the actor committed a battery for two reasons.

First, the government’s fault in the attack “does not change depending upon whether the aggressor was sane or insane at the time.” * * * “While an insane employee may or may not be less culpable personally for such attacks, the question of whether the injury was perpetrated deliberately or accidentally does not depend upon the employee’s sanity.” * * * Second, under the common law, “one who suffers from deficient mental capacity is not immune from tort liability solely for that reason.” * * * The linchpin of an action for battery, then, is simply “the intent to make contact.” * * * Thus, the Mieles’ cause of action against the government arose out of a battery, despite the attacker’s mental incompetency.

Though the majority rule is not without its critics, “the fact remains that ‘courts in this country almost invariably say in the broadest terms that an insane person is liable for his torts.’ ” * * * Individuals such as Mr. Giese are included in this category of liable actors because “ ‘mental deficiency does not relieve [them] from liability for conduct which does not conform to the standard of a reasonable man under like circumstances.’ ” * * * Indeed, the Restatement provides that, for the sane but mentally deficient, “no allowance is made, and the actor is held to the standard of conduct of a reasonable man who is not mentally deficient, even though it is in fact beyond his capacity to conform to it.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 283B cmt. c.

Otherwise, the law would err on the side of protecting actors who voluntarily make physical contacts with other people, producing injury or offense, from liability for their deliberate action. The result would be that the victims who were subjected to a harmful or offensive physical contact are at the mercy of those who deliberately come into contact with them, and must bear the costs of the injuries inflicted thereby. The practical consequences of such an interpretation would turn the law of our civil liability on its head.

For example, a man who decides to flatter a woman he spots in a crowd with an unpetitioned-for kiss, one of the examples of battery Prosser provides, Prosser, supra, § 9, at 41–42, would find no objection under the Wagners’ proposed rule so long as his intentional contact was initiated with
39
no intent to injure or offend. He would be held civilly liable for his conduct only if he intended to harm or offend her through his kiss. A woman in such circumstances would not enjoy the presumption of the law in favor of preserving her bodily integrity; instead, her right to be free from physical contact with strangers would depend upon whether she could prove that the stranger hoped to harm or offend her through his contact. So long as he could show that he meant only flattery and the communication of positive feelings towards her in stroking her, kissing her, or hugging her, she must be subjected to it and will find no protection for her bodily integrity in our civil law.

The law would serve to insulate perpetrators of deliberate contact from the consequences their contact inflicts upon their victims. Bodily integrity would be secondary to protecting a perpetrator’s right to deliberately touch another person’s body without being accountable for the consequences that contact occasioned. The “harmful or offensive” element would, in essence, be viewed from the perspective of the actor, not the objective eye of the law. Under this rule, so long as the actor does not deem his deliberate contact to be harmful or offensive, he may touch others however he wishes without liability under our law of battery. It is clear that the purpose of our civil law on battery was designed to create the opposite incentive.

* * *

Notes

1.Wagner represents the modern, majority approach on the issue of single versus dual intent in battery claims. A substantial minority of jurisdictions, however, require intent not only to cause contact, but also intent to cause injury or offense. See, e.g., White v. Muniz, 999 P.2d 814 (Colo. 2000) (denying liability of an 83-year-old woman with Alzheimer’s disease, who stuck her caregiver in the jaw for lack of intent to cause injury or offense). The Reporters’ Notes to Restatement (Third) of Torts: Intentional Torts to Persons, § 2, list California, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Nevada, New Hampshire, Oregon, Texas, West Virginia, and Wisconsin as apparently adhering to the dual-intent approach.

2.If the dual intent requirement is attractive to you, how should a court handle the scenario referenced in the case: Defendant sees an attractive woman at a party. He does not know her but believes that any woman would enjoy his attentions—so he approaches her and kisses her on the lips. Would the woman’s suit against defendant for offensive battery succeed in a dual-intent jurisdiction? How about a case involving a practical joke, where the defendant intended the contact, but only that the contact result in hilarity, not harm? Suppose, for example, that the child in Garratt v. Dailey, 46 Wash.2d 197, 279 P.2d 1091 (1955), 49 Wash.2d 499, 304 P.2d 681 (1956), had pulled the chair from under the aged plaintiff as a joke, not intending the plaintiff’s broken hip.

40
3.What if insanity renders a defendant unable to recognize that the relevant act will result in contact with the plaintiff? If the defendant had made this argument in Wagner, how would the jury assess whether the defendant’s claim was true? How does one look into the mind of another, especially another afflicted with a mental illness? Would expert testimony help?

4.Where a defendant loses all capacity for voluntary action, such as where she unexpectedly becomes incapacitated, then the defendant will not be held to be capable of forming the requisite intent. See Goodrich v. Blair, 132 Ariz. 459, 646 P.2d 890 (App. 1982) (80 year defendant suffers sudden heart attack while taking driving test and swerves into oncoming traffic); Cohen v. Petty, 65 F.2d 820 (D.C.Cir. 1933) (driver faints); Buckley and Toronto Transp. Comm. v. Smith Transp., [1946] 4 D.L.R. 721 (as a result of syphilis of the brain defendant’s driver suddenly became subject to insane delusions that his truck was being controlled by an electric beam). Nevertheless, even in such instances, the defendant may be held liable on a negligence theory if, having reason to know that he was subject to such seizures, he engages in activities that create a high degree of risk to others if he should suddenly suffer a seizure. See Reliance Insurance Co. v. Dickens, 279 So.2d 234 (La. App. 1973) (epileptic has seizure); Breunig v. American Family Insurance Co., 45 Wis.2d 536, 173 N.W.2d 619 (1970) (defendant suffered from hallucinations but had lucid moments from which the jury could infer that she was aware that she was likely to have hallucinations); Goldman v. New York Railways, 185 App.Div. 739, 173 N.Y.S. 737 (1919) (defendant’s driver kept on operating a street car after he had a dizzy spell; the accident occurred when he suffered another dizzy spell shortly thereafter).






